Inclusive Global Governance and Strengthening Multilateralism
7. On the landmark occasion of the 20th anniversary of BRICS, we reiterate our commitment
to reforming and improving global governance by promoting a more just, equitable, agile,
effective, efficient, responsive, representative, legitimate, democratic and accountable
international and multilateral system in the spirit of extensive consultation, joint
contribution and shared benefits. Bearing in mind the need to adapt the current architecture
of international relations to better reflect the contemporary realities, we reiterate our
commitment to strengthening multilateralism and multipolarity and to upholding
international law, including the Purposes and Principles of the Charter of the United
Nations (UN) in their entirety and interconnectedness in a balanced and inclusive manner,
as its indispensable cornerstone, and the central role of the UN in the international system
in which sovereign states cooperate to maintain peace and security, advance sustainable
development, ensure the promotion and protection of democracy, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all, and promote cooperation based on the spirit of solidarity,
mutual respect, justice and equality while respecting national circumstances, diversity of
national systems and development pathways, with the aim to build a brighter shared future
for the international community based on mutually beneficial cooperation.
8. We reiterate our commitment to ensuring greater and more meaningful participation and
representation of EMDCs, as well as Least Developed Countries (LDCs), especially from
Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, in global decision-making processes
and structures and making them better attuned to contemporary realities. We also call for
3
achieving equitable geographical representation in the Secretariat of the UN and other
international organizations in a timely manner, particularly by addressing the persistent
underrepresentation of developing countries, including at senior and decision-making
levels, as well as increasing the role and share of women, especially from EMDCs, at all
levels of leadership and responsibilities in these organizations. We stress the need for the
selection and appointment process of the UN executive heads and senior positions to be
guided by the principles of transparency and inclusiveness, and carried out in accordance
with all the provisions of Article 101 of the UN Charter, with due regard for recruiting staff
on a geographical basis as wide as possible and the increased participation of women, and
adhere to the general rule that there should be no monopoly on senior posts in the UN
system by nationals of any State or group of States. We also deplore attempts, including by
deliberately withholding assessed contributions, to unilaterally undermine the work of
global multilateral institutions and impair the implementation of their respective mandates.
9. In light of the ongoing selection process of the next Secretary-General of the UN and
bearing in mind the relevant provisions of the UN Charter, we note that no woman has ever
been elected for the role of Secretary General, and only one national from Latin America
and Caribbean, and only two nationals from Africa and Asia each have ever occupied this
position.
10. We agree that, in the context of the contemporary realities of the multipolar world, it is
crucial that developing countries strengthen their efforts to promote dialogue and
consultations for more just and equitable global governance and mutually beneficial
relations among nations. We acknowledge that multipolarity can expand opportunities for
EMDCs to develop their constructive potential and enjoy universally beneficial, inclusive,
sustainable and equitable economic globalization and cooperation. We highlight the
importance of the Global South as a driver for positive change, especially in the face of
significant international challenges, including deepening geopolitical tensions, rapid
economic downturns and technological changes, protectionist measures, migratory
challenges, and climate change. BRICS countries will continue playing a pivotal role in
voicing the concerns and priorities of the Global South, as well as promoting a more just,
sustainable, inclusive, representative and stable international order based on international
law.
11. We welcome the adoption of United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) Resolution
80/250 on the declaration of the trafficking of enslaved Africans and racialised chattel
enslavement of Africans as the gravest crime against humanity. W